As things, as we talk and things occur, I'm
certainly willing to move you into some kind of
discretion or digression, excuse me. My first
question is, how did you develop your interest in
oceanography? What was your career leading to
your service in Washington? Well, my interest in
oceanography came before I went to Washington.
I'd gone to school at New Mexico State University,
Las Cruces, New Mexico, and majored in physics and
minored in math, and I had planned to do graduate
work at Stanford University. I had a fellowship
all lined up right after my graduation. And about a
week before graduation, I drove up to Stanford to
talk to the professor that I was going to be working
with and got it all set. And on the way back from
Stanford to New Mexico, I picked up a copy of Life
magazine. and saw a two-page article on
oceanography in Scripps. So I decided Scripps was
on the way back to New Mexico. So I stopped into
Scripps and met another physicist there. Rusk was
his name. And he introduced me to Walter Monk, and I
talked to him for the rest of the afternoon about
what oceanography was all about and so on, and
became interested in it. I went back to New Mexico.
decided that I'd rather be in oceanography than in
physics. So I wrote a letter to Stanford and turned
down my fellowship and wrote a letter to Walter
Monk saying I'd be there in a week, see what he could
do for me. Now, I'd had three and a half years in the
Navy immediately prior to that, where I was a
quartermaster and worked on charts. And so I had a
little bit of feeling for some of the kinds of
things that I thought oceanography involved. And
I lived near the oceans all my life in Southern
California. So it was kind of a natural, I think, to
go into it. Well, like I said, about a week later, I
drove out to Scripps. And I went in to see Walter
Monk and asked him how I went about either getting a
job or getting enrolled. I wanted to do some
graduate work. And at that same day, Teddy Bullard
Sir Edward Bullard from England arrived, and he
needed a graduate student to work for him, so they
paired the two of us off, and we spent all that
summer, that was in 1949, working on heat flow
work. This was the first heat flow work that had
been done at sea. A little bit had been done by Hans
Pedersen and the Albatross expedition, but he
hadn't made any successful measurements, so We
started in on that. I spent a summer with Teddy,
which was an absolute delightful summer. Neither
of us knew much about La Jolla or Scripps at the
time. But it was a great summer. Got me started in
oceanography. Then I went on and got my master's
degree there in 1951 and worked for a number of
people at Scripps. Primarily, John Isaacs, I
would say, was the main person after working on my
thesis material. But I worked while I was there
closely with Roger Revell, who was director. He
was my most immediate thesis advisor, so I worked
as close to him as anybody. Actually, Roger was an
interesting person because he would come in in the
morning and he'd run scripts during the daytime.
He was just director at that time. In the evening,
I'd go over to his house about 8 o'clock every
night, and we'd work about 3 o'clock in the morning
on science. Almost every night. Much to the
consternation of Ellen, his wife, objected to us
spoiling all the evenings doing that. But in a way,
I kind of grew up with one of their families. I spent
several years in this kind of pattern, so I got to
know Roger and his family very well.
I left... scripts in 1955 to go to the Office of
Naval Research. I'd like to interject a couple
questions here. Did you work on heat flow from 49 to
55? That's right. And you worked with Isaacs on
heat flow too? No, I worked with John Isaacs on
another program. The heat flow was the basis of my
thesis for my PhD. And I worked primarily with
Roger Revelle on that. A few other people that I
don't recall their names right now. A physicist
who is from San Diego State was working there,
worked with me. And every once in a while, projects
would come up. And being a graduate student, you
had cheap labor there, so I'd get off on these. And
some of these were measuring waves at the bomb
tests at Bikini. Now, I want you to say a few words
about that. Let me back off just one step from that.
I guess it was in 1951
that we went out on a mid-pack cruise, which was the
first Scripps cruise after the war that went from
San Diego to Hawaii and back. And I did heat flow
work on that. The first heat flow work was
accomplished on that. That was followed by their
Capricorn expedition that went out from San Diego
to the Marshall Islands and then down to Fiji,
Samoa, Tahiti, and so on and back. And we got a lot of
heat glomations on that. And those two cruises
formed the main basis for my thesis work. There
were a few other shorter cruises afterwards, but
that was the main part of it.
51, I believe it was, I went out to the bomb tests. I
participated in, oh, three or four of these
different bomb tests, which I designed some
instruments that could be set underwater. It was
essentially a very simple thing. It was a pan
inverted with a screen on the bottom and a
basketball bladder inside. It would be half
filled with air, then ran a tube up to the surface
and to a recorder in the boat. And it required scuba
diving to set these. They were set in about 60 feet
of water. I can remember the first day I went scuba
diving, I was out in bikini with Bill Bascom, who
was quite an accomplished scuba diver at the time.
And he said, put the lung on. We put it on. We walked
into the surf. And he said, if you get water in it,
just turn up your head and blow on it and blow it out.
And he said, try it once. And I tried it once. And
then we took off. There we were. Went right down to
60 feet. That's the only lesson I had in scuba
diving. Quite different than it is today on that.
But we would go out there. And Phoenix Jennings was
out there on part of this. Set these instruments.
And I can remember the first H-bomb test. I've
forgotten exactly when that was. We were out
there. and had instruments set on it. The test went
off, and it went about five times larger than they
expected. And it radiated all the area in our
campground where we had our tents and clothes and
equipment. But fortunately, everything that we
had was self-contained in a trailer. So we moved
this aboard a ship, and it wasn't contaminated
inside. We'd lost all our clothes. All I had with me
was a bathing suit and toothbrush that I'd taken
out in the carrier. So we were able to keep in
business on that, but it wiped almost everybody in
the test scene out of business for about a month. So
we spent the month out there tuning up the
instruments and so on until the next series of
tests started. I think we were out there three
months or so on that test. And the plan of the day
would be to go out and go around all the
instruments, set them, make sure they were all set
to record. Then we were usually the last person to
leave the lagoon we needed to set our instruments
just sort of before the test, so we'd take off in the
helicopter, fly out to the aircraft carrier,
watch the blast go off from the aircraft carrier,
and then we'd take a helicopter and we'd be back in,
and they'd drop us off in a boat, and we'd go around
and pick all our records up, and we were the first
ones back in the scene afterwards, so we were kind
of the last to leave and the first back after all
these tests, and they were really interesting
tests, and we a good set of measurements on what the
waves were like that were generated from these
tests. Were you working with Walter Munk then on
the wave measurements? No, that was primarily
with John Isaacson. John was working on those and
John went out on several of those tests himself.
Let's see. Well, it was after those series of tests
and Gordon Lill came back to visit me at Scripps,
and he and John Adkins from ONR tried to talk me into
coming back to Washington. It was right at the
beginning of the IGY getting organized for it,
which was in 1957, and this was in 1955. And they
wanted me to help back there, and I felt like I was
getting in a rut at Scripps. I was spending more and
more of my time working on these programs and less
and less trying to finish up my thesis. So I felt
that the only way I'd really get myself to get right
down to it was to get away from that atmosphere. So I
went to Washington. And then it took me four years
after going to Washington before I finished up
PhD. It was working evenings and weekends. It was a
long, drawn out thing, which I finally managed to
get in 1959.
When I first went to work for ONR, Gordon Little was
my boss there. And we were in the geophysics
branch. We had three sections in there. There was a
meteorology section, earth physics section, and
an oceanography section. And I came back to head
the oceanography section. Dick Better was
actually working in the oceanography section at
that time. Gordon was head of the branch.
And it was a nice, good little group. It was one of
the most interesting places I've ever worked.
Gordon is a great guy to work for. And it was a can-do
place. The whole atmosphere around there was if
somebody had a good idea, we'd find a way to do it.
And that not only went with the scientific part of
the group, but the contracting part of ORNR was
that way. And this is really in contrast to almost
any agency that exists in the federal government
now, even NSF. If something comes up, the
questions are, what are the problems about it? All
the reasons why you can't do it instead of just the
other way around. And I think it made ONR really a
great place to do things from. A lot of good science
was supported just because of this attitude that
existed there.
Well, I worked for ONR for 10 years.
I started as head of the oceanography group and
then worked up to being head of the geophysics
branch when I left. Gordon had left to go to
Lockheed, somewhere along there, and I took over
his job.
I don't know whether there's anything about that
particular era that's... Yes, I have several
questions about ONR I'd like to ask. You
were at ONR when the Mansfield Amendment came
through. That's correct. When was the date of
that? I think it was 61. 61 is when the Mansfield
Amendment came through. I was there. Some people
have maintained that the Mansfield Amendment
almost ends the productivity of ONR vis-a-vis
oceanography. By the time it becomes more and more
narrowly construed on what kind of age you go to
oceanography, oceanography suffers. Would you
agree with that? No, I wouldn't agree with it. I
think the timing is approaching being right. That
ONR was becoming less and less a factor in not only
oceanography, but all science about that stage.
Because oceanography was getting close to being
20 years old or something. NSF had been going, I've
forgotten when NSF was started, but it was in the
50s sometime. It started out with a small budget,
but it was growing, and it was obviously the place
that should be supporting science for science's
sake on a broad basis. There was no doubt that ONR
was going to have to restrict its interests
somewhat. Now, when I was there, we were keenly
aware of this situation, and I urged the Chief of
Naval Research that it ought to support more
things like oceanography and worry less about
mathematics, psychology, nuclear physics, and
so on. And indeed, there was a shift toward that
during this time. And the Chief of Naval Research
that was Admiral Layden at that time was very
sympathetic to that point of view. I think one
could justify supporting oceanography, even in
its broadest sense, vis-a-vis supporting the
whole broad science. But now, the Mansfield
Amendment came into effect in 61. And as I recall,
it was only in effect for one year. But it had a
lasting effect that's there even now, because a
lot of the agencies say we've got to be
mission-oriented, particularly the Navy on
this. Guys like Proxmire look at things and gives
his Golden Fleece Award if they're too far off the
beam on these kind of things. I think this has
pervaded the whole business and has hung on for a
long time. But I think it was probably a timely
thing that if you hadn't had a Mansfield
Amendment, you probably would be running into the
same situation in any case. I think by this stage of
the game that O&R would be phasing out a lot of
things. I would have hoped that they could have
stayed strong in oceanography, that it could have
been one of their major fields, and that it might
support roughly a third of the work that's going on
in the business now.
NSF should be supporting about a third, the Navy
about a third, and NOAA from a civilian agency, the
civilian side, supporting about a third. That
kind of balance, it seems to me, makes more sense.
And I think that's the way it's headed. The
military has just faded off into the business, and
that's as it should. It's built way up. during
World War II, and it's phased down to a level, but
it's gradually phasing down.
So I think it shouldn't play as much of a role as it
did at one time. I'm not going to name their names,
of course, but several of your colleagues in
federal agencies at the time when you guys were so
active there maintained that this was the most
creative time of the federal bureaucracy, that
they feel as if there were more excitement in your
agency, in other agencies, NNSL, about this time
than ever before. And somehow I have inferred or
have at least drawn the conclusion that it's not
like that anymore. Now, what I'd like you to
comment on is both phases. Do you think this is
true? And if it's not like that anymore, why? Yes, I
think it was true. I think being in Washington was
fun at that time. I don't think it's that way
anymore. Those are the exact phrases they all use.
It was once fun, it's no longer fun. It's a chore
now. You're justifying everything. At that time,
you could build programs. It was very
freewheeling. And I think one of the reasons for
this is that science was on a very steep part of the
curve going up at that time. And there was more
money each year. more money significantly above
inflation on it so that you're on an expanding
curve and you could do creative things on that now
the budgets have leveled off and are approaching
inflation or maybe going up slightly with respect
to it but not much and there's more competition for
every dollar I think in part this is the reason for
this is that science has just become very
expensive and you know you can't do everything in
science anymore. There's a lot of things that
people can do if you had the money, but there just
isn't enough money to do. At that time, I think the
situation was the other way around. The
technology was such that you could put your money
into the new kinds of technology, and you could
afford to support all of the new technology at that
stage of the game. And that made it an exciting time
to be there. And I think this is just gone, and it
won't be recovered again, just by the nature of the
beast. Now things are so sophisticated
that even in oceanography we can't do. We could
spend all the money that's budgeted for science if
we really wanted to, and you just can't afford to
put priorities on things like that. OK. Now
others, in this case not your colleagues, but
people contemporaneous with you, maintain that
one of the reasons why the ONR was so innovative
then was that the tendency towards block funding,
the idea to invest good ideas, and they maintain
that now, with the concept of peer review and
careful justification, that that can't happen
anymore. What are your feelings about peer review
and careful justification of your project?
Well, again, I suspect this is related more to the
situation that exists then and now. And when I was
in ONR, we didn't have peer review. We had a group of
people that looked at programs. We made judgment.
We tend to bet on people, good people we supported,
and gave them a lot of leeway to do what they wanted.
And I think we had good results on that. We weren't
forced to justify our money so much, and therefore
we didn't, in turn, pass this on to the people that
we were giving money, as long as good results were
coming in. I think the way we used to play the game in
ONR is that we considered we'd put something like
60 or 70 percent of our money on what we called blue
chip research, just first-rate people in the
business. We'd just give them the money they
needed and let them do what they wanted. And we used
to take a smaller percentage of it and play the big
risks. And they were kind of the fun things to play.
Some of them panned out, and some of them didn't.
And that's a very fine line between what's a blue
chip and what's a big risk on it. It's no straight
line, but it gradates into it. I think as money has
become short, And even when I left the Navy, it was
getting to be more and more of a job of justifying to
DDR&E and other places your budgets, that you had
to become more critical of where you were spending
the money, get these people to write more specific
proposals. And then you had to have some way to
review these. And I think the peer system, I don't
know that it was ever initiated as such, but I think
it just grew, particularly in NSF. I think even in
the early days of NSF, there was a good possibility
that the program managers could make decisions on
what they wanted to support and so forth. And this
has gradually disappeared over the time, where
for one reason or another, including
congressional pressure that they're forced to
justify decisions they make on these, and they
need to send it out for review, get written
reviews, and so on. It's more of a protective
mechanism than an innovative mechanism of doing
research. It's to make sure that if they get in
trouble, they can show that they're right. Again,
it's just the opposite kind of attitude that I
think existed in that time, where There was an
attitude to go out and do. If there was a good idea,
you'd go out and do it.
I can give you an example of an interesting thing
that happened in O&R when Gordon and I were there,
which shows you the flexibility we had.
Bill Van Dorn from... This was right after Sputnik
went off. Bill Van Dorn from Scripps came in with an
idea of...
putting something into orbit. And his idea was to
essentially bore a hole in the ground and put about
three or four atomic bombs on it in a projectile and
fire them off one after the other as it went off to
fire this fairly heavy payload into orbit. Well,
it was an interesting thing at the time. And
Rockefeller was in town. And we got Bill Baskin. I
remember Bill Bascom got Rockefeller involved in
it. He and Rockefeller came over to my house one
evening and we discussed this whole thing. We
decided we ought to classify it at that time
because it was an interesting idea. As
a result of this, we gave a physicist at, well I'm
not sure where it was, I think it was the University
of Illinois, $50,000 to make a feasibility study.
to see whether this made any sense to put something
in orbit this way, just looking at the physics of
it.
Here's something that has no relation to
oceanography or hardly any relation to the earth
sciences or atmospheric sciences, yet we could
spend money that way and what we thought was a good
idea and follow it through. In actuality, as a
result of this, it was a great long classified
study that which I don't know how it ever came out,
but went into the whole program looking at it. But
we had flexibility. You could do things like that,
and nobody complained as long as you thought it was
a good idea and could sell it that way. I feel that
that's the kind of flexibility and attitude that
you're not able to have. I'm not sure that a lot of
people wouldn't like to have it in Washington. Now
I I think the climate has changed there where it's
just not possible to do that.
I only have one more comment along that line.
Some people maintain that to have that sort of
flexibility, not only do you need to return back to
the earlier days of ONR, but possibly what you
ought to do is make amends manager and then
responsible for the decisions and not
responsible for not responsible to the peer
reviews that is what they're saying is that now the
peer reviews have become the managers rather than
sort of the advisory committee to a competent
manager if that's good enough put for it yes it is
and i agree completely with it and i think this is
still the way onr is run that is the people you know
in onr that are supporting oceanography they make
the decisions and they have to stand on it whether
it's good decisions or bad decisions bad decision
their funding is going to get cut off as is
everybody's that gets funded for them and they may
call on people for advice but they're not they're
no fall guy for them and i agree that the the peer
review system has gotten to be a way of shedding the
responsibility and and really trying to play
things as safe as possible, which I don't think you
can do in research. I think it's tending in the
wrong direction there. Now, what it takes,
though, if you're going to have a group of people in
NSF that's supporting programs and they're going
to have to live or die by it, it takes good people
there. And I think That's probably another thing
that has changed over the years. When I was in ONR,
ONR had some of the top scientists in the country
working there. I mean, absolutely first-rate
people that have become college presidents and so
on since they left there. They were first-rate
people. They put their time in and they made
decisions on this. NSF has had good people and does
have good people, but I think, by and large, what
NSF has tended to do is bring in young people
because of the difficulty of getting people to
come to Washington, young, immature people that
are not capable of making decisions on this, and
then they have to fall back on the peer review
system in order to make good judgment. They're
just not capable of doing it themselves. And I
think this is important because you have a lot of
very young people that haven't been around Well,
as a matter of fact, you've anticipated a question
I have. How do you explain that, let me draw a
scenario for you. Roger Revelle, ONR, split in
NSL, yourself, Finn and Jennings, Isaac's going
back, and how do you explain the ending of that?
Because that no longer happens. When somebody
goes to the ONR desk now, it's almost as if they're
looking for a sabbatical.
Yeah. Well,
I don't know
how you explain that now. Even in the early days of
NSF, I think a lot of scientists went there and
spent two or three years there as just sort of part
of their careers to do that. I don't detect that so
much now. I think what you tend to get are people
that stay in Washington all the time. that never
leave, and then you have an influx of people that
come in for a very short period of time, like a year
on this. But I think ONR had, I don't know what the
mean life of people was during that, during ONR's
early stages, but I would suspect it was more like
five years or something of that order. And now I
think, well, the mean life of all, all people in NSF
may be the same, but I think it breaks down into two
groups. You have one group of people that comes in
for about a year, and then you have another group of
people that never leaves. If I look at the section
of NSF I know best, most people have been there ten
years or more, I guess. Well, they haven't been in
NSF necessarily, but they've been in the
government one way or another for a very long
period of time. Now, maybe that isn't bad. I don't
know. I tend to feel that you sort of get stale in any
job after a period of time. It probably makes sense
to move on. Those of us who are not administrators
maintain five years. I wouldn't say more like
seven, but... that order of time, you know, the
government is a tough place to work if you come in
from the outside and don't know anything about it.
And it really takes something like two years to get
up to speed so you can really know how to do things in
the government. And then you can be innovative for
maybe five years after that. Then you start going
over the same ground again. And I suspect that's
pretty much true in any job. I would think five to
seven years is... is a time people should move on,
particularly in administrative spots. I'm
saying that knowing that I've been in this spot 12
years now.